Tracker user guide
2QAB100
2 Contents
Contents
Tracker
What’s inside the box? 4
About Tracker 4
Charging Tracker 5
Attaching Tracker to an accessory 6
Turning Tracker on or off 7
Why does Tracker automatically turn off? 7
Using the dongle 8
Pairing Tracker 8
Can I use more than one Tracker? 9
Verifying the connection status 9
Checking the status light 9
Updating the Tracker firmware 9
Why can't I see the Tracker icon in SteamVR? 10
Troubleshooting Tracker 10
Trademarks and copyrights
3 About this guide
About this guide
In this user guide, we use the following symbols to indicate useful and important information:
Some apps may not be available in all regions or with your mobile operator.
This is a tip. A tip gives you an alternative way to do a particular step or procedure, or lets you
know of an option that you may find helpful.
This indicates important information that you need in order to accomplish a certain task or to
get a feature to work properly.
This provides safety precaution information, that is, information that you need to be careful
about to prevent potential problems.
This is a note. A note often gives additional information, such as what happens when you
choose to do or not to do a certain action. A note also provides information that may only be
applicable to some situations.
4 Tracker
Tracker
What’s inside the box?
You’ll find the following items:
1 Tracker
2 Dongle
3 Dongle cradle
4 USB cable
About Tracker
Attach Tracker to a compatible third-party accessory so that it can be detected and used within
the VIVE VR system.
5 Tracker
1 Sensors
2 USB port
3 Pogo pin connector
4 Friction pad
5 Standard camera mount
6 Stabilizing pin recess
7 Status light
8 Power button
Charging Tracker
Make sure to use the USB cable that’s in the box.
Connect the USB cable to the power adapter that came with your VIVE controllers, and then plug
the power adapter to a power outlet to charge Tracker.
When Tracker is fully charged, its status light either shows white if it is off or green if it is turned
on.
You can also connect Tracker to a computer’s USB port to charge it.
6 Tracker
Attaching Tracker to an accessory
▪ Standard tripod docking: Align the tripod plate’s bolt and stabilizing pin with the
corresponding holes on Tracker. Turn the tab on the bottom side of the plate clockwise
to screw Tracker securely in place.
For illustration purposes only. Third-party accessories are purchased separately.
7 Tracker
Turning Tracker on or off
▪ To turn Tracker on, briefly press the Power button.
▪ To turn Tracker off, press the Power button for 5 seconds.
Why does Tracker automatically turn off?
When Tracker turns off, check if:
▪ The battery is drained.
▪ Pairing has timed out after being idle for more than 30 seconds.
▪ No movement has happened for more than 5 minutes.
When you exit the SteamVR app on your computer, Tracker will also automatically turn off.
You may change the behaviors by selecting in Startup/shutdown in SteamVR/settings.
8 Tracker
Using the dongle
If you’re using two controllers along with Tracker, you need to connect the dongle to enable
hardware tracking.
Connect one end of the supplied USB cable to the dongle cradle, and then attach the dongle to
the cradle. Connect the other end of the USB cable to your computer.
Pairing Tracker
After turning Tracker on for the first time, manually pair it with the headset or dongle.
1. From your computer, open the SteamVR app.
2. Click , and then select Devices Pair Controller. If you see , you can also hover on
it and select Pair Tracker.
3. Press the Power button for around 2 seconds.
The status light shows as blinking blue while the pairing is in progress. The status light
turns solid green when Tracker is successfully paired.
4. Follow the on-screen instructions to complete the process.
Keep the dongle at least 45 cm (18 in) away from the computer and place it where it won’t be
moved.
Always ensure that the play area is entirely clear of all objects, obstacles and other individuals
when using Tracker on any object intended to be moved while wearing the VIVE headset.
9 Tracker
Can I use more than one Tracker?
You can use multiple Tracker hardware in your VIVE VR system, but this depends on the VR
content you're using it with.
Verifying the connection status
From your computer, open the SteamVR app. Check if the icon for Tracker shows as , which
means Tracker is detected successfully.
Checking the status light
The status light shows:
▪ Green when Tracker is in normal mode.
▪ Blinking red when battery is low.
▪ Blinking blue when Tracker is pairing with the headset or dongle.
▪ Blue when Tracker is connecting with the headset or dongle.
Updating the Tracker firmware
Do not unplug the USB cable any time before the firmware update is complete. Doing so could
result in a firmware error.
1. From your computer, open the SteamVR app.
2. If you see the icon, mouse over it to check if the firmware is out of date. If so, click
Update firmware.
3. Using the supplied USB cable, connect Tracker to one of your computer’s USB ports.
4. Once the Tracker is detected by the SteamVR app, the firmware update will
start automatically.
5. When the update is complete, click Done.
10 Tracker
Why can't I see the Tracker icon in SteamVR?
Check that your SteamVR app is updated to the latest version.
Troubleshooting Tracker
If Tracker is not detected, try the following methods to troubleshoot the issue:
▪ Make sure that Tracker is placed inside the play area.
▪ Turn Tracker off and on again to reactivate the tracking.
▪ Restart the SteamVR app. If you still get an error, reboot your computer and reopen the
SteamVR app.
11 Trademarks and copyrights
Trademarks and copyrights
©2020 HTC Corporation. All Rights Reserved.
VIVE, the VIVE logo, HTC, the HTC logo, and all other HTC product and service names are
trademarks and/or registered trademarks of HTC Corporation and its affiliates in the U.S. and
other countries.
Steam, the Steam logo and SteamVR are trademarks and/or registered trademarks of Valve
Corporation in the U.S. and/or other countries.
All other trademarks and service marks mentioned herein, including company names, product
names, service names and logos, are the property of their respective owners and their use herein
does not indicate an affiliation with, association with, or endorsement of or by HTC Corporation.
Not all marks listed necessarily appear in this User Guide.
Screen images contained herein are simulated. HTC shall not be liable for technical or editorial
errors or omissions contained herein, nor for incidental or consequential damages resulting from
furnishing this material. The information is provided “as is” without warranty of any kind and is
subject to change without notice. HTC also reserves the right to revise the content of this
document at any time without prior notice.
No part of this document may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or by any means,
electronic or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or storing in a retrieval system, or
translated into any language in any form without prior written permission of HTC.